---
layout: course-content
title: Introduction to SVG
week: 11
active: true
intro: |-
  This week we will learn the basics of SVG in Illustrator and our code editors.
graphic: svg
files:
  - title: w11-intro-to-svg.zip
    link: https://drive.google.com/uc?export=download&id=1fb6H6CIZn1I8uqtq4vXb5TiC7YyT2eot
    size: 1mb
todos:
  tasks:
    - Begin the Interactive SVG exercise
    - Review the App Branding assignment
    - Complete the Photoshop Quiz
    - Review week 12 content
  videos:
    - id: Nloq6uzF8RQ
      type: youtube
    - id: vwIVdI3WMIc
      type: youtube
    - id: AcdOzdoB390
      type: youtube
    - id: 8s70jpw5B5c
      type: youtube
---

## What are SVGs?

Scalable Vector Graphics (SVG) is an XML-based vector image format for two-dimensional graphics with support for interactivity and animation. SVG images are defined in XML text files. In this section, we are going to learn how to generate good SVG code using Adobe Illustrator and preparing it to be animated and used on the web as well as how to write our own SVG code from scratch.

## SVGs are code

SVGs are purely vector graphics written in XML markup language. We can use a pure code editor to create an SVG. Let's follow along this series of video tutorial and write SVG markup with VSCode.

### Writing SVG Code
In this video we will learn to write SVG code from scratch and integrate it into an HTML document. Read SVG reference of Writing SVG code for basic syntax and SVG shapes.

{% include snippets/video.liquid id="q_3Q9HHcXuA" %}

### SVG Attributes and CSS
It's common practice to use both SVG style attributes and CSS to style SVGs. Watch this video to learn the why and how.

{% include snippets/video.liquid id="EEtnu8OMD3o" %}

### SVG Text
Using text directly inside our SVG has lots of benefits: We can apply web fonts, masking, gradients, and textures to them and they are fully accessible.

Reference: SVG text

#### Text & web fonts
We will follow along this video tutorial to practice using <text> element to add live/accessible texts inside an embedded SVG and apply web fonts to it.

{% include snippets/video.liquid id="UKXRwuXd7rA" %}

#### Masking text
Continue with this video to learn how to use <mask> element to mask out pieces of text to create different effects:

{% include snippets/video.liquid id="B5ol4ss-mi4" %}

#### Gradients on text
In this video, we will apply gradients into the text letters using SVG.

{% include snippets/video.liquid id="xgZkRVCS07Q" %}

These online tools let us generate code for SVG gradients, CSS gradients and edit their code.

- {% include snippets/link-external.liquid link="https://briangrinstead.com/gradient/" text="Gradient Generator" %}
- {% include snippets/link-external.liquid link="https://cssgradient.io/" text="CSS Gradient Generator" %}

#### Textures on text
We can also add image textures to text using SVG and the <pattern> tag. In this video, we will make the pattern big enough to only show it once.

{% include snippets/video.liquid id="lSNnVbfvJJ0" %}

## From AI to SVG

Using Adobe Illustrator (Ai) to design graphics and then export them in SVG format allows us to use that code directly on the web and animate it using CSS. The cleaner and more organized our Ai file is, the easier it will be to manipulate the SVG code later on. Follow this videos to exporting SVGs from Illustrator for animation.

{% include snippets/video.liquid id="bWcweY66DL8" %}

### Cleaning generated SVG
Now we know that if we use SVGs generated by a tool like Adobe Illustrator, Sketch, or Inkscape, there’s lots of extra cruft that we don’t need in the files. We can use some optimization tools to clean up the SVG. Here are the two popular online tools to use.

- {% include snippets/link-external.liquid link="http://petercollingridge.appspot.com/svg-editor" text="SVG Editor" %}
- {% include snippets/link-external.liquid link="https://jakearchibald.github.io/svgomg/" text="SVGOMG" %}


## SVG Icons & Symbols
Animated SVGs are great for icons which can indicate micro-interactions and state changes and guide a user to the next action in an onboarding tour. They are commonly used to show status of loading, uploading, menu toggling, and playing/pausing a video. We will practice using SVG icons in this video tutorial.

{% include snippets/video.liquid id="EhNHe-f0LBI" %}

### SVG symbols
We will practice using SVG elements <symbol> and <use> to make SVG icon systems.

{% include snippets/video.liquid id="BO13gECyiuE" %}

### Spritebot
Spritebot is a tool used to clean up our SVGs. It can also combine numerous SVGs into a single sprite sheet for easier use on our websites.

{% include snippets/link-external.liquid link="https://github.com/thomasjbradley/spritebot" text="Download here." %}

## SVG Accessiblity
Lastly, we will learn the extended accessibility features of SVG and know when/how to hide embedded SVG from accessibility tools when needed.

{% include snippets/video.liquid id="BieUh304KDA" %}
## Resources

- {% include snippets/link-external.liquid link="https://learn-the-web.algonquindesign.ca/topics/advanced-svg/" text="Advanced SVG Lesson" %} — Text reference for all topics covered in the videos from this week.
- {% include snippets/link-external.liquid link="https://learn-the-web.algonquindesign.ca/topics/svg-cheat-sheet/" text="SVG Cheat Sheet" %} — Quick reference for all things SVG
